design/compile-commands.md, before:

# Compile commands

Interpreting source code requires a certain amount of context.

```c++
#include <stdio.h> // which file is this, exactly?

char data[sizeof(int)]; // how big is this array?

@class Foo; // objective-C, or just a syntax error?
```

C++ compilers expect this context to be passed as command-line flags (and
provide some defaults). A command might look like:
`clang -x objective-c++ -I/path/headers --target=x86_64-pc-linux-gnu -DNDEBUG foo.mm`.
Build systems are responsible for collecting the right flags for each file.

Clangd also needs this bundle of hints for the files it operates on.
It reuses the compiler's approach: first we determine a virtual
**compile command** for each opened file (ideally by consulting the build
system). Then we use this command to configure the parser.

## Compile command vs clangd flags

These are easy to conflate, and important to distinguish!

**`clangd` flags** are passed when the editor starts clangd.
They appear in the clangd log at the very start, like
```
I[...] argv[1]: --log=verbose
```

The **compile command** (or compile flags) is a **virtual** command constructed,
and interpreted within clangd.
It is logged when a file is opened, e.g.
```
I[...] ASTWorker building file /path/test.cc version 1 with command [/path]
/usr/bin/clang /path/test.cc -DNDEBUG -fsyntax-only -resource-dir=/usr/lib/clang/lib/12/
```

## What can be in a compile command?

Because clangd embeds both clang's driver (used to interpret compile commands)
and clang's parser (which is controlled by flags), most [flags that can be passed
to `clang`](https://clang.llvm.org/docs/ClangCommandLineReference.html)
will also work with clangd. The defaults are also similar to `clang` running on
the same system.

The most critical flags in practice are:

- Setting the `#include` search path: `-I`, `-isystem`, and others.
- Controlling the language variant used: `-x`, `-std` etc
- Predefining preprocessor macros, `-D` and friends

Without these flags, clangd will often spectacularly fail to parse source code,
generating many spurious errors (e.g. #included files not being found).

Many other flags are interesting though:

- Warnings are controlled with compile flags (e.g. `-Wall`, `-Wswitch`,
  `-Wno-switch`, `-Werror`...)
- Changing the target platform (e.g. `--target`) affects some builtins, like
  the size of `long`.

As well as flags, the named program (`argv[0]`) affects parser behavior.
`clang++` will parse as C++ by default, while `clang` will assume C.
`/opt/llvm/bin/clang` will search for the standard library under `/opt/llvm`
as well as the usual places.

(The working directory is also considered part of the compile command, mostly
it affects how relative paths within the compile command are interpreted).

## Where do compile commands come from?

Generally, clangd first obtains a basic compile command from a compilation
database and then applies some tweaks to it.

### Compilation databases

A [compilation database](https://clang.llvm.org/docs/JSONCompilationDatabase.html)
  describes compile commands for a codebase. It can be:
- a file named `compile_commands.json` listing commands for each file.
  Usually generated by a build system like CMake.
- a file named `compile_flags.txt` listing flags to be used for all files.
  Typically hand-authored for simple projects.

We first check for a compilation database in the directory containing the
source file, and then walk up into parent directories until we find one.

[GlobalCompilationDatabase] is responsible for discovering, caching and
refreshing compilation databases.

#### Commands for header files

Clangd parses headers like any other source file (which is why it [only supports
self-contained headers](https://github.com/clangd/clangd/issues/45)). However
most build systems don't compile headers directly and therefore don't record
compile commands for them.

If no command is available for a header, but a file has been opened that
transitively includes it, then that file's command will be used. To enable this
[TUScheduler] keeps a `HeaderIncluderCache` to look up the relevant file.

Otherwise when `compile_commands.json` is used, we'll pick some entry whose
filename most closely matches that of the header. The idea is that `bar/foo.cc`
is likely to include `bar/foo.h` and therefore have a compatible command.
This is implemented in [InterpolatingCompilationDatabase]. As it's purely a
filename-based heuristic it occasionally goes wrong.
It can also provide a decent default command for newly created files the build
system doesn't know about yet.

If a command has been "borrowed" from another file, this is noted when the
compile command is logged. (`... with command inferred from foo/bar.cc`).

#### Fallback commands

If no compilotion database is found, a very simple command like `clang foo.cc`
is used. For a real project this will often fail to find `#include`s, but it
allows clangd to work on toy examples without configuration.

### Tweaks always applied

- bare command names like `clang` are made absolute (by looking them up on the
  `$PATH`, querying `xcrun` on mac, or failing that guessing).
  This increases the chances of being able to find the standard library.
- on mac, `-isysroot` is set to the default SDK (by querying `xcrun`).
  This more closely matches the behavior of Apple's `/usr/bin/clang` (which is
  really a script that invokes the real clang with extra flags).
  Without this, the standard library again will not be found.
- `-fsyntax-only` is added because we're just parsing, not compiling.
- `-resource-dir=...` is added, because built-in headers like `<stddef.h>` must
  be the ones installed with clangd.
- certain unsupported flags like `-plugin` are dropped.

### Query-driver

If the compile command names a compiler that is present, then clangd can query
it to understand its default configuration (header search paths and target), and
then adjust the compile command to configure the clang parser to match.

The compiler (e.g. `custom-gcc`) must be compatible enough with gcc to dump its
configuration in response to this command:

```
$ custom-gcc -E -v -x c++ /dev/null
Target: arm-linux-gnueabihf
...
#include <...> search starts here:
 /opt/custom-gcc/include/c++/10
 ...
End of search list.
```

This would cause clangd to add `--target=arm-linux-gnueabihf -isystem
/opt/custom-gcc/include/c++/10` to the compile command, to better simulate this
toolchain. This is often easier than configuring the correct search paths by
hand when code is designed to build with a customized toolchain.

The compiler queried is always the `argv[0]` of the compile command, but the
clangd flag `--query-driver=/path/to/custom-gcc` must be passed to enable this.
(This must be explicitly enabled as we're executing otherwise unknown binaries!)

### Customizing compile commands

Users may want to modify the compile command used for various reasons.
This is the preferred way to choose which warnings to show, and can sometimes
be used to work around clangd bugs/limitations.

Editing `compile_commands.json` is usually not a feasable option as it is
a generated file and changes will be quickly overwritten (though writing tools
to automate customizations is possible).

The [configuration file](/config) is a simpler alternative, allowing compile
flags to be added or removed. e.g.

```
CompileFlags:
  Add: '-Wswitch'
  Remove: '-Werror'
```

## Compile command problems

Incorrect compile commands can cause problems of different severity.
In all cases, the log contains the compile command that was used, and it can be
easiest to feed variations of that command to `clang` to try to understand
the problem.

### Unusable command

If a command is completely malformed, we won't run the parser. This produces
some diagnostics which are attached to line 1 but other features on the file
will not be available (will fail with "invalid AST").

(This isn't great, maybe we should recover with a fallback command instead?)

This can be recognized by the diagnostics (often "expected exactly one compiler
job") by subsequent "invalid AST" errors, and by the "Could not
build CompilerInvocation" log message.

### Severe parsing problems

If the command was unsuitable for the file, then then the parser may run but
fail to understand much of the file. Typical causes:

- couldn't find included headers because of missing `-I` flags
- command is for parsing C but the code is C++

Usually diagnostics reported near the top of the file will make these problems
obvious.

### Subtle parsing problems

Sometimes only a few constructs do not get parsed correctly. For example if
the code uses some C++20 constructs but the compile command doesn't specify
the language version, or if some expected preprocessor symbols are missing.

This may happens when compile commands from another compiler are used, and
the defaults are different (e.g. GCC currently defaults to C++17, vs C++14 for
clang).

This will usually result in diagnostics that pinpoint the problem.

### Headers outside the project directory

When opening a header outside the project directory (for example, a header from
an external library that's included by a file in the project), clangd will
typically fail to find a compilation database (which is usually located in the 
project directory), and fall back to a default command that may not include
flags that are important for parsing the header's code (for example, include
paths to locate the headers that _it_ includes).

See [this FAQ question](https://clangd.llvm.org/faq#how-do-I-fix-errors-I-get-when-opening-headers-outside-of-my-project-directory)
for a way to work around this.

[GlobalCompilationDatabase]: https://code.woboq.org/llvm/clang-tools-extra/clangd/GlobalCompilationDatabase.h.html#clang::clangd::GlobalCompilationDatabase
[InterpolatingCompilationDatabase]: https://code.woboq.org/llvm/clang/lib/Tooling/InterpolatingCompilationDatabase.cpp.html#clang::tooling::(anonymousnamespace)::InterpolatingCompilationDatabase
[TUScheduler]: https://code.woboq.org/llvm/clang-tools-extra/clangd/TUScheduler.h.html#clang::clangd::TUScheduler

Commit message:

Expand documentation about compile command inference for header files

design/compile-commands.md, after:

# Compile commands

Interpreting source code requires a certain amount of context.

```c++
#include <stdio.h> // which file is this, exactly?

char data[sizeof(int)]; // how big is this array?

@class Foo; // objective-C, or just a syntax error?
```

C++ compilers expect this context to be passed as command-line flags (and
provide some defaults). A command might look like:
`clang -x objective-c++ -I/path/headers --target=x86_64-pc-linux-gnu -DNDEBUG foo.mm`.
Build systems are responsible for collecting the right flags for each file.

Clangd also needs this bundle of hints for the files it operates on.
It reuses the compiler's approach: first we determine a virtual
**compile command** for each opened file (ideally by consulting the build
system). Then we use this command to configure the parser.

## Compile command vs clangd flags

These are easy to conflate, and important to distinguish!

**`clangd` flags** are passed when the editor starts clangd.
They appear in the clangd log at the very start, like
```
I[...] argv[1]: --log=verbose
```

The **compile command** (or compile flags) is a **virtual** command constructed,
and interpreted within clangd.
It is logged when a file is opened, e.g.
```
I[...] ASTWorker building file /path/test.cc version 1 with command [/path]
/usr/bin/clang /path/test.cc -DNDEBUG -fsyntax-only -resource-dir=/usr/lib/clang/lib/12/
```

## What can be in a compile command?

Because clangd embeds both clang's driver (used to interpret compile commands)
and clang's parser (which is controlled by flags), most [flags that can be passed
to `clang`](https://clang.llvm.org/docs/ClangCommandLineReference.html)
will also work with clangd. The defaults are also similar to `clang` running on
the same system.

The most critical flags in practice are:

- Setting the `#include` search path: `-I`, `-isystem`, and others.
- Controlling the language variant used: `-x`, `-std` etc
- Predefining preprocessor macros, `-D` and friends

Without these flags, clangd will often spectacularly fail to parse source code,
generating many spurious errors (e.g. #included files not being found).

Many other flags are interesting though:

- Warnings are controlled with compile flags (e.g. `-Wall`, `-Wswitch`,
  `-Wno-switch`, `-Werror`...)
- Changing the target platform (e.g. `--target`) affects some builtins, like
  the size of `long`.

As well as flags, the named program (`argv[0]`) affects parser behavior.
`clang++` will parse as C++ by default, while `clang` will assume C.
`/opt/llvm/bin/clang` will search for the standard library under `/opt/llvm`
as well as the usual places.

(The working directory is also considered part of the compile command, mostly
it affects how relative paths within the compile command are interpreted).

## Where do compile commands come from?

Generally, clangd first obtains a basic compile command from a compilation
database and then applies some tweaks to it.

### Compilation databases

A [compilation database](https://clang.llvm.org/docs/JSONCompilationDatabase.html)
  describes compile commands for a codebase. It can be:
- a file named `compile_commands.json` listing commands for each file.
  Usually generated by a build system like CMake.
- a file named `compile_flags.txt` listing flags to be used for all files.
  Typically hand-authored for simple projects.

We first check for a compilation database in the directory containing the
source file, and then walk up into parent directories until we find one.

[GlobalCompilationDatabase] is responsible for discovering, caching and
refreshing compilation databases.

#### Commands for header files

Clangd parses headers like any other source file (which is why it [only supports
self-contained headers](https://github.com/clangd/clangd/issues/45)). However
most build systems don't compile headers directly and therefore don't record
compile commands for them.

If no command is available for a header, but a file has been opened that
transitively includes it, then that file's command will be used. To enable this
[TUScheduler] keeps a `HeaderIncluderCache` to look up the relevant file.
[This issue](https://github.com/clangd/clangd/issues/123) tracks a further
improvement to use inclusion relationships to determine the header command
even if the including file hasn't been opened.

Otherwise when `compile_commands.json` is used, we'll pick some entry whose
filename most closely matches that of the header. The idea is that `bar/foo.cc`
is likely to include `bar/foo.h` and therefore have a compatible command.
This is implemented in [InterpolatingCompilationDatabase]. As it's purely a
filename-based heuristic it occasionally goes wrong.
It can also provide a decent default command for newly created files the build
system doesn't know about yet.

If a command has been "borrowed" from another file, this is noted when the
compile command is logged. (`... with command inferred from foo/bar.cc`).

#### Fallback commands

If no compilotion database is found, a very simple command like `clang foo.cc`
is used. For a real project this will often fail to find `#include`s, but it
allows clangd to work on toy examples without configuration.

### Tweaks always applied

- bare command names like `clang` are made absolute (by looking them up on the
  `$PATH`, querying `xcrun` on mac, or failing that guessing).
  This increases the chances of being able to find the standard library.
- on mac, `-isysroot` is set to the default SDK (by querying `xcrun`).
  This more closely matches the behavior of Apple's `/usr/bin/clang` (which is
  really a script that invokes the real clang with extra flags).
  Without this, the standard library again will not be found.
- `-fsyntax-only` is added because we're just parsing, not compiling.
- `-resource-dir=...` is added, because built-in headers like `<stddef.h>` must
  be the ones installed with clangd.
- certain unsupported flags like `-plugin` are dropped.

### Query-driver

If the compile command names a compiler that is present, then clangd can query
it to understand its default configuration (header search paths and target), and
then adjust the compile command to configure the clang parser to match.

The compiler (e.g. `custom-gcc`) must be compatible enough with gcc to dump its
configuration in response to this command:

```
$ custom-gcc -E -v -x c++ /dev/null
Target: arm-linux-gnueabihf
...
#include <...> search starts here:
 /opt/custom-gcc/include/c++/10
 ...
End of search list.
```

This would cause clangd to add `--target=arm-linux-gnueabihf -isystem
/opt/custom-gcc/include/c++/10` to the compile command, to better simulate this
toolchain. This is often easier than configuring the correct search paths by
hand when code is designed to build with a customized toolchain.

The compiler queried is always the `argv[0]` of the compile command, but the
clangd flag `--query-driver=/path/to/custom-gcc` must be passed to enable this.
(This must be explicitly enabled as we're executing otherwise unknown binaries!)

### Customizing compile commands

Users may want to modify the compile command used for various reasons.
This is the preferred way to choose which warnings to show, and can sometimes
be used to work around clangd bugs/limitations.

Editing `compile_commands.json` is usually not a feasable option as it is
a generated file and changes will be quickly overwritten (though writing tools
to automate customizations is possible).

The [configuration file](/config) is a simpler alternative, allowing compile
flags to be added or removed. e.g.

```
CompileFlags:
  Add: '-Wswitch'
  Remove: '-Werror'
```

## Compile command problems

Incorrect compile commands can cause problems of different severity.
In all cases, the log contains the compile command that was used, and it can be
easiest to feed variations of that command to `clang` to try to understand
the problem.

### Unusable command

If a command is completely malformed, we won't run the parser. This produces
some diagnostics which are attached to line 1 but other features on the file
will not be available (will fail with "invalid AST").

(This isn't great, maybe we should recover with a fallback command instead?)

This can be recognized by the diagnostics (often "expected exactly one compiler
job") by subsequent "invalid AST" errors, and by the "Could not
build CompilerInvocation" log message.

### Severe parsing problems

If the command was unsuitable for the file, then then the parser may run but
fail to understand much of the file. Typical causes:

- couldn't find included headers because of missing `-I` flags
- command is for parsing C but the code is C++

Usually diagnostics reported near the top of the file will make these problems
obvious.

### Subtle parsing problems

Sometimes only a few constructs do not get parsed correctly. For example if
the code uses some C++20 constructs but the compile command doesn't specify
the language version, or if some expected preprocessor symbols are missing.

This may happens when compile commands from another compiler are used, and
the defaults are different (e.g. GCC currently defaults to C++17, vs C++14 for
clang).

This will usually result in diagnostics that pinpoint the problem.

### Headers outside the project directory

When opening a header outside the project directory (for example, a header from
an external library that's included by a file in the project), clangd will
typically fail to find a compilation database (which is usually located in the 
project directory), and fall back to a default command that may not include
flags that are important for parsing the header's code (for example, include
paths to locate the headers that _it_ includes).

See [this FAQ question](https://clangd.llvm.org/faq#how-do-I-fix-errors-I-get-when-opening-headers-outside-of-my-project-directory)
for a way to work around this.

[GlobalCompilationDatabase]: https://code.woboq.org/llvm/clang-tools-extra/clangd/GlobalCompilationDatabase.h.html#clang::clangd::GlobalCompilationDatabase
[InterpolatingCompilationDatabase]: https://code.woboq.org/llvm/clang/lib/Tooling/InterpolatingCompilationDatabase.cpp.html#clang::tooling::(anonymousnamespace)::InterpolatingCompilationDatabase
[TUScheduler]: https://code.woboq.org/llvm/clang-tools-extra/clangd/TUScheduler.h.html#clang::clangd::TUScheduler
